# Q&A with Rich Edwards of Pineapple Smash Crew

## How did you get interested in video games? What led you to start developing your own games?

I was always interested in games since the master system / megadrive era, I think even at the age of 7 I had the idea that somehow I'd like to be involved in making games.. I was always drawing the characters and sketching map ideas for my favourite games of the time, which included things like the sonic games, cannon fodder, desert strike, decap attack, streets of rage.. I showed more of an interest in the Art side of things at school and eventually ended up in a computer arts uni course which taught me 3d modelling, rigging, animation, texturing.. and went on to get a job at a small-mid size games company in Newcastle. While working there I got more into the idea of also designing games as well as making the art, and learned quite a niche engine called Quest3d, which was used a lot in Architecture Visualisation but also functioned as a games engine. Sadly the company went into insolvency and I was made redundant, which is when I decided to try making a game of my own. I found out about a business development scheme in Middlesbrough called the DigitalCity Fellowship that gives small grants to help start ups, and luckily made it through the application process by showing some game prototypes I'd made and talking about my ideas for PSC. I also had the privilege that my parents were able to let me move back in so I could focus on development without the financial buden of rent, which was a massive help.

## What was your experience publishing your game in 2012?
it was kind of wild, I had applied to show an early build of PSC at the indiegames section of EGX called Leftfield Collection, which was a small area that showcased small creators work for free- quite a big deal because the show is huge and it costs a good chunk of money to show there otherwise. I owe a huge debt to the organiser David Hayward for selecting PSC to be shown.. And that year Rock Paper Shotgun were giving awards to their favourite game of the indie section and amazingly PSC won! and even more amazingly, Valve were in the show at the time I think promoting CS:GO, and David encouraged me to go over to the booth and mention to one of their representatives that I'd won an award, and they gave me their details so I could follow up about getting the game on Steam.. this was a pretty great lining up of events for that to occur! Because getting on Steam back then was a big deal, it was just before green light and it wasn't an easy thing to do at all. I have to also mention later in developemtn I contacted an amazing musician called Echolevel/Syphus who agreed to work on the music, which turned out absolutely rad and I'm sure really helped it get attention!

## What other games inspired you to develop Pineapple Smash Crew?
Cannon fodder was a big one, there was an old game called gain ground on master system which doesn't really have the same mechanics but I love that viewpoint, and also it featured an interesting array of weapons that made you play a bit different depending on which you had.. and also the actual real life game Pool, I love games that feature bouncing around physics objects :)
There seems to be some deep lore in the game, what can you tell us about the story of Pineapple Smash Crew?
err, I'm struggling with that one as it was some time ago I wrote all that! but I remember being inspired by playing Space Hulk as a kid, and imagining all these huge floating hulks floating through space, and then imagining who would have built them and what might cause the disasters that stranded them...

## Indie development was very hard back in 2012. What tools do you wish you had available when you were developing the game that are widely accessible now?
I was using Quest3d which was robust but quite limited.. I think I wish I'd used Unity even at the time, (but it'd come on leaps and bounds since), because there had been a bit of talk with Humble Bundle about potentially being involved but they were big into the mac and linux support at the time and Q3d was win only. We tried for a bit to get it working but it wasn't happening. Also back then I'd have loved what Blender is today, but I couldn't get into it then it had a more obscure way of working to my mind..

## What did your typical day-to-day look like when developing this game? How did you organize your time? Did you rely on any specific tools heavily during development?
I had a really messed up sleep pattern.. working till 3am and getting up midday. It was all a bit chaotic, but generally I worked on whatever seemed like the biggest hole in the game at the time- by that I mean get the basic mechanics working, then maybe the level generation seemed to simplistic, or it needed more weapon variety, then maybe I needed some menu system to tie things together.. There was a loose plan but generally I just kept looking at it and worked on whatever stuck out the most as needing work. Tools wise just the engine, I used Maya at the time for the 3d, and Photoshop

## If you could go back and do one thing differently about your game’s development, what would it be?
I think I felt a real pressure once it was accepted to be published on Steam to get it ready and release, and I wish I'd worked on it a bit longer before release, although I did add things I felt were missing via updates later.  Maybe also try to engage with marketing a bit more, I'm quite introvert and it really doesn't come naturally..

## If you had all the means necessary to make any game you wanted, what would it be, and what would you hope to achieve?
any game at all.. I'd really like to make some procedurally generated future city (including interiors) inspired by hardwar, with flavour of blade runner and fifth element,  where you fly around in a ship, but there's also fps sections of missions.. it'd be a huge undertaking and I'd never finish it! but if someone else made it I'd play

## With your wealth of knowledge, what advice would you give to upcoming indie developers?
This is a really hard one because things are so different now. If you're solo I'd say try to get into a position where you're self sustaining, either with a day job and working evenings/weekends, or if you can get any kind of business grant or arts scheme, or if you're lucky enough to be living with parents.. but in some situation where the time pressure to complete your project isn't crushing, because you need to feel free to explore ideas and prototype before committing on direction. Early access wasn't really a thing when I started but that could be a good way to help sustain development and grow a community
The Roguelike genre has expanded considerably in the last 10 years. Where do you want to see it go in the next 10 years?
another tough question! I really enjoyed Tower Of Guns when it came out, which felt like a really fresh take on the Roguelike concept.. I'm not a purist, I love seeing ideas melded together (although I love true strict Roguelikes as well) - I'm always excited to see what happens when Roguelike concepts are applied to completely different genres and something new is born.. I don't really have a vision I'm just excited to see what people will come up with next :)

## Are there any projects or things you'd like to promote or draw attention to 
I don't have any games in the works at the moment I'm doing freelance illustration these days- but I do have plans to get back into development so watch this space :)
